MUSDEWAR is the acronym of an Individual Marie Skłodowska Curie Fellowhip conducted by musicologist/researcher Dr Anna Papaeti from 1 December 2017 to 30 November 2019 (Horizon 2020) at the Department of Social Anthropology at Panteion University, Athens. Scientist in charge was Professor Athena Athanasiou. The project explored the use of music in situations of detention in (post) civil-war Greece (1947–1957).  It documented and reconstructed the use of music and musical life in detention through archival and textual research, and interviews with former detainees, composers and intellectuals of the time. It critically examined: (1) the use of music as a means to punish, humiliate, terrorize, and ‘re-educate’ prisoners; (2) the complex issue of performance under command, examining official camp orchestras and choirs at the notorious prison camps at the barren island of Makronissos, among others; (3) the role of the  Makronissos Radio Station of Military Forces, one of the first to be established in Greece in 1948; (4) music compositions, (clandestine) performances, and debates on Greek music – such as the rebetiko – by prisoners themselves. Analysing these aspects combined historical and empirical research with a critical and theoretical framework. The project explored the entanglement in the use of music in this context: on the one hand, it was an integral part of terror and repression mechanisms, on the other, it had the potential to empower prisoners/detainees. Project website: https://soundscapesofdetention.com. Drawing on MUSDEWAR's findings and results, the uploaded article "On Music, Torture, and Detention" was written during the fellowship. It analyses thoughts and reflections concerning the latent engagement of music research with the long standing association of music, terror, and violence, underlying the urgent need for more studies on this topic that document, analyse and help us better understand the ways in which music can be damaging for subjectivity. It appeared in a special issue of the journal "Transposition. Musique et sciences sociales": Hors-série 2 | 2020, Sound, Music and Violence" edited by Luis Velasco-Pufleau.
